Heterogeneous Encoders Scaling In The Transformer For Neural
Machine Translation
Jia Cheng Hu, Roberto Cavicchioli, Giulia Berardinelli, and Alessandro Capotondi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
Department of Physics, Informatics and Mathematics
name.surname@unimore.it
Abstract
Although the Transformer is currently the best-performing architecture in the homogeneous configuration (self-attention only) in Neural Machine Translation, many State-ofthe-Art models in Natural Language Processing are made of a combination of different Deep
Learning approaches. However, these models often focus on combining a couple of techniques
only and it is unclear why some methods are chosen over others. In this work, we investigate the effectiveness of integrating an increasing number of heterogeneous methods. Based
on a simple combination strategy and performance-driven synergy criteria, we designed the
Multi-Encoder Transformer, which consists of up to five diverse encoders. Results showcased
that our approach can improve the quality of the translation across a variety of languages
and dataset sizes and it is particularly effective in low-resource languages where we observed
a maximum increase of 7.16 BLEU compared to the single-encoder model.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT), in Natural Language Processing (NLP), describes the problem of automatically translating a text sentence from one language into another using Neural
Networks. Over the past years, translation systems performed increasingly better thanks to the
design of more sophisticated and effective models. Models consist of an encoder that extracts a
representation from the input sequence in the source language and a decoder that generates the
same sentence in the target language.
There are currently several types of neural processing methods.
The most popular ones
consist of self-attentive networks (SANs or ANNs) [31], recurrent neural networks [15] (RNNs)
and convolutional (CNN) ones [37, 3, 6]. More recently, the works of [17] and [11, 10] proposed
two additional variants. These methods differ in the way they process a sequence: for instance,
recurrent neural networks [15] apply the same operation over the sequence in a sequential manner
and each element is given access to the previous ones thanks to one or two hidden states. Selfattentive neural networks [31] instead, make use of the Attention mechanism [1, 21], a method
that constructs representations made of the Softmax-weighted sum of all the elements in the

sequence. Each of these approaches presents advantages and drawbacks on its own. For instance,
RNNs better capture the sequentiality in the data compared to stateless methods [12], such as
CNNs and SANs, that rely on simple numeric encodings. However, as a drawback, the first
suffers from computational limitations and a limited receptive field.
In the presence of a variety of possible processing strategies, State-of-the-Art models often
leverage the strength of a combination of multiple approaches in both NLP [4, 8, 35, 16, 7]
and Vision [10, 12].
The effectiveness of hybrid models outlines the benefits of introducing
heterogeneous ways of processing inside the same architecture. However, often in these architectures, only two methods are considered and to the best of our knowledge, little has been
done on the combination of a larger number of heterogeneous encoding methods. Additionally,
different techniques in State-of-the-Art models are often closely intertwined in one single processing block. As a matter of fact, there is a lack of consensus on how to combine effectively
each technique. This type of integration approach is limiting in terms of applicability since not
all encoding strategies can be easily combined. For instance, in a single encoder architecture,
combining either the convolution or the self-attention with recurrent methods ultimately results
in a recurrent encoder.
In this work, we propose an investigation into the effectiveness of combining an increasing
number of diverse neural network processing methods. In particular, we adopt the Transformer
decoder [31] and an encoder that is made of an increasing number of heterogeneous methods.
Moreover, we propose a very simple encoder combination strategy such as the simple sum. On
one hand, it is bound to be less performing than ad-hoc hybrid designs.
On the other, its
simplicity enables the addition of an arbitrary number of independent and diverse encoders.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related works and several encoding
techniques. Then, in Section 3, we introduce the Multi-Encoder Transformer, which encoder
combines up to five processing methods: Self-Attention, Convolutional, LSTM, Fourier Transform (FNet), and Static Expansion. In Section 4, we present five translation datasets on which
our models are trained and tested. Finally, in Section 5, we present the results and discuss the
advantages and limitations of our multi-encoder transformer. In particular, we discover that
different methods synergize differently when combined with each other and that low-resource
languages benefit the most from the increase in the number of heterogeneous encoders.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: (i) we analyze the effectiveness of simply
summing multiple encoding strategies in the Transformer, in particular adopting the RNN, CNN,
SAN, Static Expansion and Fourier Transform (FNet) across a variety of Language translation
tasks; (ii) we analyze the synergies of the five processing methods and design a dual-encoder,
triple encoder, quadruple and quintuple encoder based upon the results; (iii) we show that the
multi-encoding achieves better performances with respect to the baseline Transformer, despite
each encoder presenting a poorer performance in the single instance; (iv) we show that lowresource languages are those that benefit the most from combining heterogeneous encoders.

Related Works
Many works in several research fields explored the benefits of combining multiple, sometimes
complementary, encoding strategies. QRNNs [3] tackled the computational burden of RNNs

and proposed to exploit the efficiency of the convolution operation while preserving the strong
sequential awareness using recurrent pooling layers in various NLP tasks. In Neural Machine
Translation [4] integrated the self-attention layer in the GNMT [34], a full RNN network based
on stacks of LSTM networks [9]. Conversely, [8] explored the opposite solution and integrated
the LSTM inside the Transformer. The works of [33] and [35] merged the self-attention method
and convolution on a deep level, forming a moving window in which relationship among sequence
tokens are extracted on a local level instead of a global one. On a similar level, in Audio Speech
Recognition, best-performing architectures such as the Conformer [7] and SqueezeFormer [16]
rely on a combination of convolution layers and self-attentive blocks to capture both local and
global correlations respectively in the spectrum representation. Similar ideas were applied in
other tasks such as Reading Comprehension [36] and Image Classification [5]. The adoption of
multiple encoders is natural for some problems, such as those involving multiple input sequences
[30, 13] which also led to the investigation of optimal interconnection between the encoders and
the decoder [18, 8, 4]. Also, the scalability of Transformers has been deeply investigated in a
variety of contexts [32, 14, 19, 25, 2] which mostly focus on increasing the number of layers or
sequence length.
In contrast to these works, our work is the only one that investigates the effectiveness of
increasing the number of heterogeneous encoding methods in the Transformer and present hybrid
architectures made of an unprecedented number of strategies.

Heterogeneous Multi-Encoder
3.1
Encoding Strategies
Given the input sequence X = {x1, x2, . . . , xN}, xi ∈Rd and d the hidden dimension, we describe
five encoding strategies based on recurrency, convolution, self-attention, Fourier transform and
static expansion.
LSTM. Recurrent Neural Networks are sequence modelling methods inspired by recurrent
functions, which output at time step t ∈{1, 2, . . . , N} are affected by all the input of the
previous steps by means of the hidden states. The hidden state consists of one or multiple
vectors depending on the architecture. In this work, we consider the LSTM [9] encoder whose
formula is showcased below:








ft = sigmoid(Wfxt−1 + Ufht−1 + bf)
it = sigmoid(Wixt−1 + Uiht−1 + bi)
ot = sigmoid(Woxt−1 + Uoht−1 + bo)
zt = tanh(Wcxt−1 + Ucht−1 + bc)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙zt
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)







where W, U ∈R4·d×d, b ∈R4·d and ft, it, ot are the forget, input, output gates, whereas
ht, ct represent the hidden states. We restrict to the uni-directional formulation because the
bidirectional processing of the input is already provided by the bidirectional nature of selfattention, which supports the goal of experimenting with diverse encoding strategies.

ConvS2S. Convolution networks were partially introduced in Natural Language Processing
to overcome the computational inefficiency of recurrent models [3] but later proved to be an
effective alternative to other sequence modelling architectures and are even able to achieve
State-of-the-Art performances [6, 35, 20, 33].
In this work, we will focus on the ConvS2S
encoder [6]. Similar to the Vision case, its working principle lies in the filter banks learning
the local and most simple semantics among elements in the sequence during earlier stages and
extracting longer and more complex relationships in the higher-order layers. Given an input
sequence X and an odd kernel size k, the encoder is made of a set of filters W ∈R2·k×2·d that
perform the convolution operation for each time step t = {1, 2, . . . , N} in the input sequence.
The output dimension is twice the model dimension in order to be fed into the GLU function,
which represents the non-linear component of the layer:
GLU(a, b) = a ⊗sigmoid(b)
where a, b ∈Rd are the two halves of the output vector.
Self-Attention. The attention mechanism was first introduced in NLP in [1], and it was
applied to recurrent models drastically improving the performances by allowing the encoder
information to be distributed on each encoder input rather than one single state vector. The
method was later refined in [21] and the two works provided the foundation of the Transformer
[31]. Its main component, the self-attentive layer, consists of the following operations (considering the single-head case):
Self-Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√
d
)V
where Q, K, V ∈RN×d are linear projections of the same input. The method has been proven
to be able to extract the syntax and semantics as well as capture long-range relationships of the
sequence thanks to the global and bidirectional access to the whole input right at the first stage
of the network compared to the previous method.
Static Expansion. The Static Expansion [10] proposes to distribute the sequence into an
arbitrary number of elements. In its essence, the idea consists of a Forward phase where the
input of length is transformed into a new sequence one featuring a new target length, and a
Backward where it’s transformed back to the original one. In practice, the input is linearly
projected four times, producing K, VA, VB, S ∈RN×d. Given the desired length NE, 2 · NE
expansion vectors are considered, denoted as EQ, EB ∈RNE×d. The static expansion layer
performs three operations.
(i). First, the dot product similarity is computed between the expanded queries and the
keys obtaining the length transformation matrix L:
L = EQK⊺
√
d
(1)
The result is fed into a ReLU function and normalized. The sequences featuring new lengths
are computed in the following way:
P fw
i
= Ψ(ReLU((−1)i+1L), ε)
i ∈1, 2
F fw
i
= P fw
i
(Vi + Ei)
i ∈1, 2
(2)

Ψ : (X, ε) →Y , X, Y ∈RN1×N2 is the normalization function and ε ∈R>0 the coefficient
ensuring numeric stability.
(ii). Using the same matrix of Equation 1, the sequence is transformed back to its original
length (Backward step):
P bw
i
= Ψ(ReLU((−1)i+1L⊺), ε)
i ∈1, 2
Bbw
i
= ReLU(P bw
i
F fw
i
)
i ∈1, 2
(3)
(iii). The two results are combined through a sigmoid gate (sigmoid function indicated with
σ):
out = σ(C) ⊙Bbw

+ (1 −σ(C)) ⊙Bbw

(4)
It can be seen in the first version of the Static Expansion, the collection of 2 · NE expansion
vectors are learnable parameters of size d. Since the original formulation was developed for
Image Captioning instead of NLP tasks, we enrich the formulation by providing each expansion
vector more awareness about the sequence by feeding them into a bilinear projection described
as:
E
′
Q = EQ(X⊺(WX)
√
T
)
E
′
B = EB(X⊺(WX)
√
T
)
(5)
where X ∈RT×d is the input sequence, W ∈Rd×d and EQ, EB ∈RNE×d are learnable weights.
FNet layer. The Fourier Transform describes a mathematical operation that converts a
function defined in the time domain into its spectral representation. In particular, it extracts
the coefficients of its sinusoidal components localized in the frequency domain. The Discrete
Fourier Transform consists of the discrete formulation which is designed to address discontinuous
and sampled signals. In [17] they adopt such a method and replace the self-attention in BERT,
achieving remarkably close performances despite a parameter-less formulation.
The discrete
Fourier transform is defined as:
N−1
X
t=0
xt+1e−2πi
fk+1 =
N tk,
0 ≤k ≤N −1
which is denoted in vector form as F(X) ∈CN×d. The FNet layer is made of two DFTs applied
over the sequence dimension first and then over the hidden dimension, finally only the real part
of the results is preserved:
FFNet(X) = Re(Fd(FN(X)))
The mixing of tokens along the two dimensions efficiently provides enough accessibility of the
sequence to the higher order units, such as non-linear projections, in order to form meaningful
compositions of its elements.

Figure 1: Multi-Encoder Transformer.
3.2
Multi-Encoder Transformer
The Multi-Encoder Transformer is made of the Transformer itself and multiple encoding blocks
joined together by means of a simple sum or concatenation as depicted in Figure 1. Encoder
blocks, depicted in Figure 1, consist possibly of a stack of convolution filters, self-attentive layers,
LSTMs, Fnet layer, or static expansion. All of them include skip-connections and normalization
layers, with the exception of the LSTM for the first and ConvS2S for the latter.
The computational burden of the additional encoder is mitigated by the absence, in almost
all cases, of the Feed-Forward layer which represents one of the computational bottlenecks of
the transformer model. The only two exceptions are the baseline Transformer encoder, where
the component is kept to maintain consistency with the original formulation, and Fnet layers, in
which the Feed-Forward is necessary for the otherwise parameter-less definition of the module.

Experimental setup
4.1
Datasets
We used five datasets in our experiments. The IWSLT 2015 English-Vietnamese (En-Vi) corpus,
the IWSLT 2017 English-Italian (En-It) corpus, two TED talks in Galician-English (Gl-En),
Slovak-English (Sk-En) and a Spain-English (Sp-En) corpus provided by the European Language
Resource Coordination (ELRC). We denote the case of “Gl-En” and “Sp-En” as low-resource
language setups. Low-resource languages commonly refer to less studied, re-source scarce, and
less commonly taught languages among other definitions [22].
In our work, we denote lowresource languages as those that involve less than 30,000 training pairs.
Sequences whose post-tokenization length is greater than a certain threshold are discarded,
which results in a negligible smaller training size but a notably smaller peak GPU memory
footprint. In all training instances, the target and the source language vocabulary are shared.

Source
Language Pair
Total num. pairs
Max epoch
Vocab. size
Training max. length
TED Talks
Gl-En
10017

4139

ELRC
Sp-En
21007

4288

TED Talks
Sk-En
61470

4232

IWSLT15
En-Vi
133317

4384

IWSLT17
En-It
231619

4246

Table 1:
Data size and training configuration for each translation task.
Each vocabulary is created using the BPE algorithm [29]. The maximum number of epochs
is chosen based on the number of training steps required for the validation accuracy to start
decreasing. For instance, the En-It training requires significantly fewer epochs than En-Vi most
likely because of a higher similarity between source and target languages. More Details are
reported in Table 1.
4.2
Models
The baseline model denoted as “Base” consists of the Transformer with 6 layers, d=512, num heads=8,
dff=2048. When an encoder is indicated as “Base”, we refer to the “Self-Attention + FeedForward” case. For the multi-encoder Transformer, the number of additional encoders, as well as
the number of additional layers for each block, depends on the experiment configuration and
is selected in the following range of values 3, 6, 12, 18. The Static Expansion layer uses the
following 12 choices of static expansion coefficients { 6, 6, 12, 8, 12, 8, 6, 6, 12, 8, 12, 8 }. The
choices of these specific coefficients are arbitrarily made and it is out of the scope of this work
to search for the optimal configuration. All kernels in the ConvS2S layers are of width 3.
4.3
Training Details
Words are split according to the Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) [29], and no lower casing is applied. Adam optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, ε = 10−9) and Label Smoothing regularization
(smoothness γ = 0.1) are adopted. We use the Noam learning rate scheduler as described in
[31] and 4,000 warm-up steps. Training pairs are sampled without replacement using a target
length-oriented bucketing until the mini-batch reaches 4,096 words. Finally, models are trained
up to the number of epochs reported in Table 1.
4.4
Evaluation Method
We evaluate the performances using the BLEU metric [24]. In particular SacreBLEU [27]1. The
inference algorithm consists of the Beam Search with beam size 4 and in contrast to the standard
practice, no checkpoint averaging is done since the selection criteria are often time-based and
lead to different results according to the computational resources.
1SacreBLEU signature: BLEU + case.mixed + lang.[src-lang]-[dst-lang] + numrefs.1 + smooth.exp + tok.13a +
version.2.0.0

Encoder
BLEU
Base [28]
31.11
Base (ours)
31.13
LSTM
29.21
ConvS2S
30.95
Static Exp
29.40
FNet
29.56
Table 2:
Single encoder performances on the “En-Vi” test set.
“Base” denotes the SelfAttention encoder.
Task
N
BLEU
Gl-En

13.03
Sp-En

27.22
Sk-En

27.15
En-Vi

31.13
En-It

32.86
Table 3:
Baseline scores on the “En-Vi” test set. N represents the number of Transformer
layers in the baseline.

Results
5.1
Single Encoder Performances
We evaluate the performances of each single encoder strategy by replacing the encoder block in
the Transformer (with both six encoding and decoding layers) with all five encoding methods in
the “En-Vi” translation task. This data set is chosen for the analytic experiments throughout
the rest of the experiments.
Each single encoder performance is reported in Table 2. Since transformers are sensible to
hyperparameters and implementation details [23, 26] we show that our baseline achieves a very
similar performance compared to the ones typically observed in the literature. In the particular
case of [28] it presents a negligible difference of 0.02 BLEU, paving the way for a fair comparison.
In the single-encoder case, the baseline model outperforms all the other ones. Table 3 reports the
baseline performances across all translation tasks. Hence, the Self-Attention method performs
better than the others in the single-encoder configuration.
5.2
Dual-encoder Transformer and Synergy Study
In Table 4 we show how the Dual-Encoder Transformer performs when the baseline, whose
encoder is made of Self-Attention layers, is combined with other encoding techniques.
The
performance seems to increase proportionally to the number of additional layers M in some
cases. This is particularly evident in the case of the LSTM whereas the impact of increasing the
number of layers is less significant in other cases. The number of layers for the models presented
throughout this work is based on the results in Table 4.
We observe that combining two encoders does not guarantee the overall system performs at

Encoder
BLEU
Base
31.13
Base + ConvS2SM=6
30.34
Base + ConvS2SM=12
30.21
Base + FNetM=6
29.20
Base + FNetM=12
29.38
Base + Static ExpM=6
31.51
Base + Static ExpM=12
31.73
Base + LSTMM=6
29.52
Base + LSTMM=12
30.84
Base + LSTMM=18
31.22
Table 4:
Performances comparison of the dual-encoder Transformer made of the baseline and
other encoding methods on the “En-Vi” test set.
Method
Single-Encoder
Twin Dual-Encoder (δ)
Base
31.13
30.64 (-0.49)
LSTM
29.21
28.32 (-0.89)
ConvS2S
30.95
30.88 (-0.07)
Static Exp
29.40
29.12 (-0.28)
FNet
29.56
26.51 (-3.05)
Table 5:
Twin Dual-Encoder Transformer SacreBLEU scores on the “En-Vi” test set.
δ
represents the difference w.r.t the baseline.
least as well as the single encoder case. All dual-encoders yielded a worse score compared to the
baseline with the exception of the “Base + LSTMM=18” and “Base + Static ExpM=12” which
instead scored better with a margin of 0.09 and 0.60 BLEU. This means that such improvements
are caused by neither the architectural structure nor the increase of parameters alone since
other instances performed similarly if not worse. This claim is further supported by the poor
performances reported in Table 5 in which encoders are duplicated and summed together.
Table 4 also shows that, despite the simplicity of the combination strategy, it is possible
to design a Dual-Encoder Transformer that performs better than its respective single-encoder
counterparts. To further investigate this aspect, given the set of encoding methods E={B, L,
C, S, F} representing the self-attention, LSTM, Static Expansion and FNet respectively, we
measure the synergy sij ∈R
between method i and j simply as the performance difference
between the dual-encoder i + j and the single-encoder made of the method j. The Synergy
matrix S is reported in Table 6.
Static Expansion and the LSTM combined well with the Transformer encoder, the latter case
was expected thanks to the works of [4, 8]. On the contrary, the ConvS2S case contradicts the
effectiveness observed in literature [33, 35, 7, 16] which highlights the limitations of our trivial
combination strategy. The pair “Base + FNet” seems to perform the worst.

B
L
C
S
F
B
-0.49
+2.01
-0.61
+2.33
-2.19
L
+0.09
-0.89
-0.18
+0.19
-2.08
C
-0.79
+1.56
-0.07
+0.67
-1.44
S
+0.60
+0.38
-0.88
-0.28
-3.39
F
-3.76
-1.73
-2.83
-3.23
-3.05
Table 6:
Synergy matrix of dual-encoders on the “En-Vi” test set. For brevity, encoders and
the number of layers are denoted with letters. B=BaseM=6, L=LSTMM=18, C=ConvS2SM=6,
S=Static ExpM=12 and F=FNetM=6. Each entry in row i and column j represents the difference
in terms of BLEU score between the dual encoder i + j and the single encoder performance of
method j.
5.3
Scaling Encoders
Based on the Synergy matrix reported in Table 6 we increase the number of encoders in the
Multi-Encoder Transformer and discuss their performances across all data sets.
To decide which methods are used in the dual and triple encoder configurations, we select the
top three values of the formula maxi,j∈{1,...,5}{sij+sji} applied on the Synergy matrix reported in
Table 6. In particular, the top three values are represented by 2.93, 2.10 and 1.38 corresponding
to “Base + Static ExpM=12”, “Base + LSTMM=18” and “LSTMM=18 + ConvS2SM=6”. For this
reason, we design the Dual-Encoder as “Base + Static Exp”, the Triple-Encoder is made of
“Base + Static Exp + LSTM”, the Quadruple-Encoder is made of “Base + Static Exp + LSTM
+ ConvS2S” and the Quintuple-Encoder is made of all encoding methods. The number of layers
for each additional encoder is configured according to the size of the training set, in particular,
for “Gl-En” and “Sp-En” we deploy a smaller version of the Multi-Encoder Transformer.
Several observations can be made from the results reported in Table 7. (i). First of all,
the Dual-Encoder outperforms the baseline across all data sets of different sizes and languages,
whereas increasing the number of encoders beyond two leads to mixed results. In particular,
the performance increase can be appreciated most in the case of two encoders; beyond this case,
the improvement is smaller if not even worse. This may explain why State-of-the-Art models in
the literature typically combine two deep learning methods at most. (ii). The Multi-Encoder
Transformer achieved a maximum increase of 5.35 and 7.16 BLEU in the case of “Gl-En” and
“Sp-En” respectively, suggesting that richer encoder representations can compensate for the
lack of data. Therefore, adopting multiple heterogeneous encoders can be a suitable strategy
for low-resource languages. (iii). In the case of bigger datasets, the Multi-Encoder Transformer
can be beneficial even though there is no clear relationship between data size and the increase
in performance. For example, “En-It” and “Sk-En” tasks benefit more from the Dual-Encoder
configuration compared to “En-Vi” despite having a greater and a smaller number of training
samples respectively. (iv). The case of the Quintuple-Encoder appears to be the breaking point
of the benefits of our approach, however, this may be caused by the Fourier Transform method
not combining well with others rather than a limitation of the scaling method
Overall, increasing the number of deep learning methods in the encoder can be beneficial
but results may depend on the application and data size, and Deep Learning practitioners may

Task
N
Single
M
Dual (δ)
Q
Triple (δ)
U
Quadruple (δ)
V
Quintuple (δ)
Gl-En

13.03

17.68 (+4.65)

17.83 (+4.80)

18.38 (+5.35)

12.07 (−0.96)
Sp-En

27.22

33.63 (+6.41)

32.81 (+5.59)

34.38 (+7.16)

30.81 (+3.59)
Sk-En

27.15

27.96 (+0.81)

27.59 (+0.44)

26.85 (−0.3)

26.62 (−0.53)
En-Vi

31.13

31.73 (+0.60)

31.71 (+0.58)

30.19 (−0.94)

28.90 (−2.23)
En-It

32.86

33.78 (+0.92)

33.27 (+0.41)

32.90 (+0.04)

32.03 (−0.83)
B=Self-Attention, S=Static Expansion, L=LSTM, C=ConvS2S, F=Fourier
Single=B, Dual=B+S, Triple=B+S+L, Quadruple=B+S+L+C, Quintuple=B+S+L+C+F
Table 7:
BLEU scores of the Multi-Encoder Transformer across all translation tasks. N represents the number of Transformer layers. M, Q, U and V represent the number of additional
Static Expansion layers, LSTM layers, ConvS2S layers and Fourier layers in the Dual-Encoder,
Triple Encoder, Quadruple and Quintuple Encoder respectively. δ denotes the difference with
respect to the baseline. The best scores for each translation task are underlined.
Figure 2: Multi-encoder Transformer performances.
consider a trade-off between performances and computational cost in case they decide to follow
this strategy.
5.4
Memory and Inference Cost
Although we removed, wherever possible, the feed-forward layer, the additional encoders inevitably introduce a significant additional computational cost and memory footprint as can
be seen from Table 8. As a result, the multi-encoder Transformer is increasingly less efficient
than the single-encoder baseline depending on the number of additional encoders. Fortunately,
benefits can be observed early in the dual-encoder configuration.
5.5
Limitations of the Study
The performances reported in this work do not necessarily represent the full capabilities of each
model. We focused only on one configuration of the entire hyperparameter space. In particular,

Model Task
Single
Dual
Triple
Quadruple
Quintuple
ω
θ
ω
θ
ω
θ
ω
θ
ω
θ
Gl-En, Sp-En
5.9
26M
8.3
31M
11.6
46M
12.8
51M
16.0
64M
Sk-En, En-Vi, En-It
11.8
48M
16.7
61M
26.4
99M
27.6
109M
30.8
135M
Table 8:
Number of parameters (denoted with θ) and the number GFLOPS (denoted as ω)
required by the Multi-Encoder Transformer for the forward step of a sequence of 128 tokens in
both encoder and decoder.
we adopted the learning rate scheduler, optimizer, and initialization method of [31] and the same
batch size is used for most configurations. While such choices are ideal for the Transformer, they
may not be suitable for all the architectures introduced in this work. The exploration of a variety
of configurations is often recommended in order to fully appreciate new models. Such fine-tuning
practice is beyond the scope of the work.

Conclusions
In this work, we conducted an empirical study of the effectiveness of implementing an encoder
with an increasing number of heterogeneous Deep learning methods. We considered five Deep
Learning methods: self-attention, LSTM, convolution, static expansion, and Fourier transform.
We discovered that the Multi-Encoder Transformer can be an effective architectural design for
two encoders. However, by increasing the number of encoders beyond two, the impact is limited
and can be both positive, such as in the case of low-resource languages, and harmful in other
instances.
Despite combining different encoders with a simple sum, the Multi-Encoder Transformer,
particularly the Dual-Encoder configuration, outperformed the baseline across all benchmarks.
However, connecting more than two encoders resulted in mixed impact. We suspect this might
be due to the extreme simplicity of our combination method.
Future works can investigate
better combining each encoder representation or even formulating an interconnection module
specifically designed to leverage the diversity of different Deep Learning methods.